Perl
====
These are the scripts that were used with the scripts bundled with Chado to load LIS data. The following is a description of the scripts in the context of the data loading pipeline.

## Data loading pipeline

### Organisms

Before any data can be loaded into the database the organism that data corresponds to must be present. Adding your organism can be achieved in two ways:

1. Add the organism using an SQL query:

    ```
    INSERT INTO organism (abbreviation, genus, species, common_name) VALUES ('G.max', 'Glycine', 'max', 'soybean');
    ```
or
2. Using a GMOD tool:

    ```
    gmod_add_organism.pl --abbreviation G.max --genus Glycine --species max --common_name soybean
    ```

### fasta files

fasta files must be loaded before their analyses so that features can be mapped back to their locations on the sequences.

1. Sometimes fasta files have extra content in their name lines. To remove what's in excess use:

    ```
    gmod_fasta_names.pl --names <identifiers_of_names_to_save> --append _pep --outfile <file_to_write>
    ```
Here the argument to `--names` is a camma seperated list (no spaces) of identifiers that will be used to determine what values in the name line will be kept, i.e. `--names AC,TC,contig`. Note that if nothing in the name matches an identifier then the name line will be left blank. The `--append` flag should only be used if a string of text is to be appended to all the names in the file. In this example "\_pep" has been appeneded onto the names, which should be done with all fasta files representing polypeptides since "\_pep" is used by the LIS to allow mRNAs their polypeptide features to have the same uniquename values while preserving uniqueness. The argument to `--outfile` is the file the processed fasta file should be written to. If this flag is not provied then the processed fasta file will be written to stdout.

2. fasta files must be convert to gff3 format in order to be loaded. This is done with a GMOD tool as follows:

    ```
    gmod_fasta2gff3.pl --type <probably_chromosome_or_polypeptide> --fasta_dir /path/to/your/fastas
    ```
3. Once the fasta is converted to a gff then you can load it using the GMOD bulk loader:

    ```
    gmod_bulk_load_gff3.pl --organism <common_name> --gfffile <your_converted_fasta_file_name>
    ```
4. If you loaded polypeptides from a fasta file then refer to the Cleaning up section on how to make sure these are appropriately named.

### gff files

As mentioned previously, gff files must be loaded after their fasta file so their features can be mapped to locations on the fasta sequences.

1. Sometimes scores in gff files are non-numeric values. Remove these, and change the value of the source column using:

    ```
    gmod_gff3_prepreprocessor.pl <your_gff_file> --outfile <output_filename>
    ```
2. The bulk loader is supposedly faster if you break your gff file into smaller pieces. Also, the contents of your gff file must be in parent first order in order for the GMOD bulk loader to accept it. This can all be achieved using a GMOD tool:

    ```
    gmod_gff3_preprocessor.pl --gfffile <your_prepreprocessed_ggf_file> --splitfile 1
    ```
`--splitfile 1` means you'll split the file based on the contents of column 1 - the chromosome.
3. If the previous step failed, as it sometimes does, you must split the file by hand. The following bash script splits your prepreprocessed gff file on column one:

    ```
    #!/bin/bash
    for chr in `cat <your_prepreprocessed_gff_file> | cut -f1 | sort | uniq`
    do
        grep "$chr" <your_prepreprocessed_gff_file> > $chr
    done
    ```
4. To load a single gff file into the database use the GMOD tool:

    ```
    gmod_bulk_load_gff3.pl --gfffile <your_prepreprocessed_gff_file> --organism <organism_common_name> --analysis --noexon
    ```
Here `--gfffile` takes the path to the gff file you want to load as an argument, `--organism` takes the common name of the organism the gff corresponds to in the database, and `--analysis` specifies that the gff file is an analysis so that the appropriate entries in the analysisfeature table will be created. The `--noexon` flag should only be used if exons are present in the gff file; as part of the loading prosses gmod\_bulk\_load\_gff3.pl infers the exons from the gff file and will load them unless the `--noexon` flag is given.
5. If you don't want to run the previous command for each piece of your split gff file then use the bash script:

    ```
    gmod_bulk_load_gffs.sh <organism_common_name>
    ````
This script runs the previous command on all files in the current directory with the extensions .gff3 or .gff3.sorted. Note the only argument is the common name of the organism the gff files correspond to.

### Cleaning up

Unfortunately nothing is perfect; sometimes gmod\_bulk\_load\_gff3.pl will create duplicates of polypeptides. Furthermore, the default uniquename field values for mRNAs are typically autogenerated as well as the uniquename and name fields for polypeptides.

### feature residues

### Multiple Sequence Alignments

### Phylogenetic trees
